---
layout: post
title: "Lowest Landau level"
date: 2018-01-06
excerpt: "How to do projection onto LLL"
tags: [Landau level]
comments: true
---

* toc
{:toc}

# Projection onto the Lowest Landau level

A convenient formulation of quantum mechanics within the subspace of the lowest Landau level wave developed by Girvin and Jach, and was exploited by Girvin, MacDondau, and Platzman in the magneto-roton theory of collective excitations of the incompressible states responsible for the fractional quantum Hall effect.

Briefly, we first consider the one-body case and choose the symmetric gauge. The single-particle eigenfunctions of kinetic energy and angular momentum in the LLL are

$$
\phi_m=\frac{1}{(2\pi2^mm!)^{1/2}}z^m \exp(-|z^m|/4)
$$

where $$m$$ is a non-negative integer, and $$z=\frac{x+iy}{\ell}$$. Clearly, any wave function in the LLL can be written in the form of an analytic function of $z$ times a Gaussian factor

$$
\psi(z)=f(z)e^{-\frac{|z|^2}{4}}
$$

So, the subspace in the LLL is isomorphic to the Hilbert space of analytic functions. Accordingly, we can define the inner product $$(f,g)$$ of two analytic functions $$f(z),g(z)$$ with the measure

$$
d\mu(z)\equiv (2\pi)^{-1}dxdye^{-|z|^2/2}.
$$

We can define bosonic ladder operators that connect $$\phi_m$$ to $$\phi_{m+1}$$.

$$
\begin{align}
a^\dagger  & =\frac{z}{\sqrt{2}},  \\
a & = \sqrt{2} \frac{\partial}{\partial z},
\end{align}
$$

which satisfies the conditions 

$$
\begin{align}
a^\dagger \varphi_m & = \sqrt{m+1}\varphi_{m+1}, \\
a   \varphi_m       & = \sqrt{m}\varphi_{m-1}, \\
(f,a^\dagger g) & =(af,g), \\
 (f,ag) &=(a^\dagger f,g).
\end{align}
$$

All operators that have non-zero matrix elements only within the LLL can be expressed in terms of $$a $$ and $$a^\dagger$$. It is essential to notice that the adjoint $$a^\dagger $$ is not $$z^*/\sqrt{2}$$ but $$a= \sqrt{2}\partial/\partial z$$ of $$z^*/\sqrt{2}$$ onto the LLL by following 

$$
(f, \frac{z^*}{\sqrt{2}}g) = (\frac{z}{\sqrt{2}}f,g)=(a^\dagger f,g)=(f,ag).
$$

So we find $$\bar {z^*} = 2\frac{\partial}{\partial z}$$. (With  $$\bar{}$$  denoting the projected operator.)

> * Since $$\bar{z}^* $$ and $$z$$ do not commute when we need to project an operator which is a combination of $$z^*$$ and $$z$$, we must first normal order $$z^*$$ to the left of $z$ and then replace  $$z^*$$ with $$\bar z^*$$. 

With this rule in mind, we can easily project onto the LLL any operator that involves space coordinates only.

One example is the one-body density operator in momentum space 

$$
\begin{align}
\rho_\mathbf q & = \frac{1}{\sqrt{A}}e^{-i\mathbf q\cdot \mathbf r} \\
               & =\frac{1}{\sqrt{A}}e^{-\frac{i}{2}(q^*z+qz^*)} \\
               & =\frac{1}{\sqrt{A}}e^{-\frac{i}{2}qz^*}e^{-\frac{i}{2}qz},
\end{align}
$$

where $$A$$ is the area of the system, and $$q = q_x+iq_y$$. Hence 

$$
\begin{align}
\bar \rho_q & = \frac{1}{\sqrt{A}} e^{-iq\frac{\partial }{\partial z}}e^{-\frac{i}{2}q^*z}  \\
            & = \frac{1}{\sqrt{A}}e^{-\frac{|q|^2}{4}}\tau_q,
\end{align}
$$

where $$\tau_q = e^{ -iq \frac{\partial}{\partial z}-\frac{i}{2}q^* z} $$ is a unitary operator satisfying the closed Lie algerba. 

$$
\begin{align}
\tau_q\tau_k & = \tau_{q+k}e^{\frac{i}{2} q\wedge k} \\
[\tau_q,\tau_k] & =2i\tau_{q+k}\sin\frac{q\wedge k }{2}
\end{align}
$$

Where $$q\wedge k=\ell^2 (\mathbf q\times \mathbf k )\cdot \hat {\mathbf z}$$. We also have $$\tau_q\tau_k\tau_{-q}\tau_{-k}=e^{i q\wedge k }$$. This is a familiar feature of the group of  translations in a magnetic field because $$q\wedge k$$ is exactly the phase generated by the flux in the parallelogram generated by $$\mathbf q \ell^2$$ and $$\mathbf k\ell^2$$. Hence, $$\tau$$ forms a representation of the magnetic translation group. In fact, $$\tau_q$$ translates the particle a distance $$\ell^2 \hat{\mathbf z}\times \mathbf q $$ . This means that different wave vector components of the charge density do not commute. It is from here that non-trivial dynamics arise even though the kinetic energy is quenched in the LLL subspace. 

This formalism is generalized to the case of the many particles with spins. In a system with area $$A$$ and $$N$$ particles the projected charge and spin density are 

$$
\begin{align}
\bar{\rho_q} & = \frac{1}{\sqrt{A}} \sum_i^N \overline{e^{-i\mathbf q\cdot\mathbf r_i}} \\
             & =\frac{1}{\sqrt{A}}\sum_i^N e^{-\frac{|q|^2}{4}}\tau_q(i)\\
\overline{S_q^\mu} & =\frac{1}{\sqrt{A}} \sum_{i=1}^N \overline{e^{-i \mathbf{q}^{\prime} \cdot \mathbf{r}_i}} S_i^\mu \\
                   & =\frac{1}{\sqrt{A}} \sum_{i=1}^N e^{-\frac{|q|^2}{4}} \tau_q(i) S_i^\mu,
\end{align}
$$

> * We immediately find that, unlike the unprojected operators, the projected spin and charge density operators do not commute: 
>   $$
>   \left[\bar{\rho}_k, \bar{S}_q^\mu\right] =\frac{2 i}{\sqrt{A}} e^{\frac{|k+q|^2-|k|^2-|q|^2}{4}} \overline{S_{k+q}^\mu} \sin \left(\frac{k \wedge q}{2}\right) \neq 0
>   $$
>   This implies that within the LLL, the dynamics of spin and charge are entangled, when you rotate spin, the charge  gets moved. As a consequence of that, spin textures carry a charge. 

